When you were growing up in Bryant, what did you do
for fun?
At what age? Well, you moved here when you were 12,
so say 12 to 20.
Well, when I came here when I was 12, Of course, we
had very little time. I mean, that was true of the
entire society.
We walked to and from school, and
we were close enough to the school and were given
enough time to go to our homes for lunch. So that
meant that we made
four trips a day to and from school. And then I had
chores to do around the house at all times. Every
day I had to carry my part of the load, such as
bringing in the wood to fill the wood boxes at the
fireplace. Shoveling out the hashes, carrying
out the hashes. Just tasks that a boy of that age
could accomplish. And then generally on good days
when we could, well in the fall we'd play a little
sand lock football. Five or six or ten
neighborhood boys would get out and play.
At another time it would be baseball or something
like that. There was no organized play as such. As a
consequence, we became much more self-reliant
than the youth of today and much less naive. And I
think had a whole lot better time.
Where did you live when you first came here? I lived
at 509, I believe it is, East 26th Street. It's just
one block from the courthouse. It's only four
blocks from Main Street. But I was not permitted to
go to Main Street. Why was that? It just wasn't
done. I didn't have any business being downtown on
Main Street, so I was not permitted to go. No other
boy was here.
None of my associates were permitted to do it
either. Or if they were, I didn't know about it.
But of course, we did have the run of the town as
such. And
due to the fact that there was a minimum of traffic,
we could go. virtually anyone's house that we
knew.
If we told where we were going and then were
we were all of us I guess it was social custom today
instructed that we were not to stay for meals and to
return to our own homes for our meals.
Summertime we had household or yard tasks
assigned to us virtually every day. Working in
gardens, mowing grass, pulling up weeds, doing
those things. Then after we got older, like in high
school where we had more privileges, then we could
come downtown. Were the Moody Houses built then?
Yes. We were allowed, as a growing up boy, if
I did all my tasks, as I was supposed to throughout
the week, I was granted an allowance, it was
called, which was enough to attend the movie on
Saturday and to get an ice cream soda, which was
quite a treat. and much looked forward to all week.
Were there any major social events for, say, the
high school children? Well, yes. We had
junior-senior dance and things like that, and we
attended football games both here and to a lesser
degree important game there might be a
caravan developed say to go to Caldwell a nearby
town or if we had done rather well an excursion
might be gotten up like one time I recall we went to
Waco on we had a special train and the entire
community participated
I would say that, of course, you always talk about
the good old days weren't really that good, but
really I think in some instances they were in that
events were not so frequent.
People's time was more fully utilized in the
necessities of living. I mean, just the daily
necessities of living.
When there were events, special events, well, I
think you appreciated them somewhat more and you
got a much broader participation.
There were numerous cultural events. in the
community also. Yes,
as was always true, but they were not quite as
available as they are now. I mean,
but it wasn't too long till you could go buy cars,
but for instance, they had a program out there in
Guyana Hall when I was just a boy here, very much
like the
town hall is now of national entertainment
brought here. For instance, I heard Paul Whiteman
and his great jazz orchestra there when I was about
13 years old, which I've never forgotten. It was
quite an event because of the
foot-patting nature of the music. It was quite
appealing to me and all these popular so-called
jazz music has always appealed to me ever since,
but I shall never forget that. What was the
Depression like in Brown? Did it have a great
effect here? No. Brown was very fortunate.
We had very few vacant buildings. In fact,
virtually none. None of our banks went under. None
of our saving his institutions went under.
The professors and related employees at the
university lived like absolute monarchs in
teams. They were on fixed salaries that had been
set by the legislature
some two years previous and
those salaries were not changed and legislature
didn't meet in a special session to reduce them or
anything and as a consequence a just ordinary
professor out there could afford domestic help
and many of them had they built rent houses and
really did very well on dollar figures that would
be laughable to you today, but a
man with $250 a month income at that time could just
really have just almost anything that you might
think you might want and save money too.
This was the consequence. There was very little
unemployment, relatively speaking. The
agricultural community suffered greatly
because of virtually just total collapse of farm
prices. But there was active employment here in
Bryan. People did not lose their jobs and most of
the businesses could and there was a supply of
money. Money was very dear to come by but we had
quite a concentration of it. Thanks to Texas A&M
University and
I would say that the hardest hit was the building
trades but There was, uh, Bryan and College
Station were very fortunate, very fortunate
indeed.
Were you here during the war, World War II? Yes, a
portion of it. I served two and a half years in the
military myself. Did the war affect Bryan at all?
Well, yes, I think Bryan and College Station was
affected by the war in many ways.
One, we had an air base located here called Bryan
Field.
We also had numerous training units that were
involved at Texas A&M. It was a Navy unit, Air Force
unit, Army units that were receiving various
types of training in connection with the
university. There was various programs there
then. We, like many places, were certainly a
militarily oriented community at that time. We
did not have some of the disasters that other
communities had in
losing a lot of our young men by death, like
Caldwell did, for instance. They had part of their
National Guard unit was at Corregidor. little
town like Caldwell, maybe 2,000 people in, lost 25
of their finest boys one afternoon.
People suffered a lot.
There was hardly ever a day that some friend or the
son of of a close family or something like that was
not mortally wounded or lost or something. War is
not a very good time. Was it as big a shock as they
seem to make it in history books to everyone here?
What? Was December 7th the shock that everyone
says it is? Do you remember that? It was to me. I was a
young married person. I had a young wife and
three children, three little babies. And I
remember when it came on the radio that Sunday, it
was very shocking, extremely shocking, but not
frightening. You weren't frightened? No. Were
you mad? Yes. The whole, the whole nation was
angry.
I think that, I'll say this, that I'm totally
convinced, I was then, I continue to be to this day,
that the National Administration totally failed
to appraise
reaction and the attitude of the citizenship of
the country. Well,
there was a deliberate effort. Pearl Harbor was
played down badly. We were not advised until after
World War II was over as to what actually happened
at Pearl Harbor, how devastating it was.
But it is my best judgment. From what I knew then and
what I learned later and from my associates and
everyone I knew, they thought the American people
would, I mean the federal government thought the
people of this country would collapse with fear.
The people would have fought them with their bare
hands on the beaches, welcomed the opportunity.
There may be some places where people were
fearful, but I never did hear of them and I never did
meet anybody later that indicated there was any
fear.
Where did you serve? Just all over the United
States.
I was 33 years old and I had a wife and three children
and wasn't actually taken in until I tried for a
commission in every branch of the service except
the Marines and failed for physical reasons to
qualify. I finally ended up as an instructor in the
Air Force Ground School. Even though I could fly an
airplane, I couldn't qualify as a flight
instructor. As a consequence, I was just moved
from pillar to post all over the country. So,
most undistinguished military career. Since
World War II, Brian, It's really started to grow.
It seemed like to me, I don't know exactly when it
started, but it grew. What areas do you think have
grown the most in the Brian Codd Station? You mean
physically? Physically, yeah. Business and
things like that.
Well,
until recently,
The economic and the population growth of Bryan
and College Station had been relatively uniform.
Going back as far as about 1935, I have seen studies
that indicated the growth to be at about 3.5% per
annum, taken on an average of five-year bites,
averaging out bites of five years each. That was
true until about 1960, maybe 1965. The impression
of substantial growth
has been more acute In the latter stages of that, I
mean, 3% of 100 is only three. You don't notice
them. But 3% of 1,000 becomes 30. And you begin to
notice them. But when you get 3% of 10,000, you get
300. and you can and you spot them rather so this is
what's been occurring but somewhere about 65 or
there on then the growth has begun to accelerate of
course very obviously the primary area of growth
has been in and around texas a&m university both in
residential housing, and now more recently, just
an outbreak of student housing in the form of
apartments.
The enrollment of Texas A&M University has
increased more than a hundred percent in just
relatively recent years. When President Rutter
took office, I think the student enrollment was
only about ten thousand.
I understand now that it's near to 24,000, which
has occurred, what, within eight years? And of
course, this has brought a tremendous influx of
all sorts of services and supply outlets and
things to service
the population. both student and I. In fact, it's
only, I would say it's only been in the last 15 years
that the student population has been a factor in
the community, and don't misunderstand that. I
mean, they were not disregarded, they were
important, but they primarily lived on campus,
supplied virtually all their needs on campus.
They,
They were not at all the factor in the community
they have become.
Where do you think the outlook in this area is? Is it
good? All I can do is take the figures
of the Department of Commerce, which were
confirmed by the Texas Bureau of Business
Research at Operation Connection University of
Texas, which I believe rated Bryan and College
Station as number one growth area in the next ten
years in individual income in the whole United
States, and number two in population.
I think that this is pretty
well a factor. I don't agree with the population
thing is continuing. I anticipate a plateauing in
population, perhaps.
But obviously the personal income thing, which is
really the most important in establishing a
lifestyle and standard of living and so forth, Do
you think there's going to be any industrial
growth? Yes, but not in the sense that the average
individual thinks in terms of.
I think that the industry that may come will be
educationally related. I think what we may see
here is more and more
I don't know quite how to put it into words
technologically oriented consulting firms or
small what they call clean air type industries
things like that probably service related
industries more than more than the manufacturing
type. I can't contemplate any manufacturing
simply because we don't have anything to
manufacture.
Well, I want to thank you again for the interview.
Well, I think that we ought to go back a little bit.
The
The community is somewhat unique.
It basically was established by the Texas New
Orleans Railroad. The original town site was
Boomba, which is three miles east of the present
town site. But the Texas New Orleans Railroad came
through here and bought 640 acres, a league of
land, from, really it was from the Stephen F.
Austin estate. Mr. Brown, who was related to Mr.
Marriott, one of Mr. Austin's sisters,
sold them the land and then they surveyed it into
town lots and so forth. And the railroad,
stopped at Milliken in 1860,
which was a terminus, a railroad terminus, for a
great distance of country. Near its railhead, to
the north of that railhead, was somewhere in
Kansas. And everything in between had to go one
place or the other for supplies. The Milliken
Railhead, or terminus, had him taken the place of
the Port of Galveston. But the Civil War stopped it
there. And they resumed construction on the
railroad after the conclusion of the Civil War. I
believe it reached Bryan in 1866.
And Bryan was a terminus for a while. And then it
moved, the railroad moved on and eventually
terminated in Dallas. but is now Dallas. But from
that time on, the town has been a very active sort of
a town. And
of course, the addition of the Texas A&M College
obviously the most significant thing that really
ever happened to it.
Did you say that this, in the beginning, Bryan was a
railroad town? It was a railroad terminal. It was
not a railroad
town in the sense that that's understood where
many railroads meet or intersect or a railhead or
anything like that. It was all of these towns were
created by the railroad.
As the railroad proceeded, they actually made the
town. Many of the lots in Bryan are still owned by
the Texas Town Lock Company, which was a, which is a
subsidiary and part of the, let me see, what was it?
was first the Houston and Texas Central. Then it
was the Texas and New Orleans. And then it merged
with Sun City. But the Texas Town Lock Company has
been an operating identity
since 1865
or 66, right here in Brown. Do you think the
railroad will ever come back?